+++
date = "2020-12-30"
tags = ["rates", "volatility", "swaptions", "swaps", "plotly", "visualisation"]
title= "Rates, Volatility and the Virus -- Visualisations of key market drivers in 2020"
description = "We make a visual recap of 2020 in the rates market. For this we utilize the Plotly package and its various interacitve figures.
+++
== Overview
In 2020 we had some unprecedented movements in global markets coming from the Covid-19 pandemic. Initially the hit to asset prices was tremendous and volatitlity got to highs not seen for a long time. For a moment, the paradigm of putting on a carry trades in all asset classes, seemed to had vanished. But this short glimse at how market forces could reach new equilibrium price levels, was just not bearable for institutions in developed capital markets. After years of ever increasing balance sheets of all mayor central banks, new and yet bigger stimulus was again the subscription. The path forward was clear: central banks stepped in and bought up virtually everthing, and with their hands tied at the lower bound in rate setting, this time governments also joined the spending party. Investors quickly got the message: carry, buying the dip and leverage were again top of the agenda. For the rates market that meant more of the same from previous years: rock bottom interest rates and volatility. But let us now have a closer look at how this all played out after a short layout of our style of presentation.  
== Why an visual and interactive recap of 2020?
Before writing this blog post I had in mind the tons of research, banks produce when the year comes to a close. What I wanted to make different, was the the static nature of all this. Sure thing, researcher can pick a good bunch of figures. But wouldn't it be nice to just slice through every trading day of the year by yourself? Or have the whole year played as an animation in as little as one minute time?So I put on some animations, interactive charts which are a bit more "explorable". I would be very delighted if you have some feedback to those. So let's get started.
== Swap Curves and Basis
Our first chart is the EUR yield curve in 2020. The below chart has data points for all trading days in 2020 and can be slided through with the slider at the bottom of the figure. It can also be played as an animation. While the yield curves way to new lows by trading below zero in almost it's entirety, is quite remarkable, also the narrowing of the basis between 3M and 6M curve is worth mentioning. But see all this below:

For the narrowing it is quite interesting to look at how the curves underlying fixings actually evolved throughout the year:

== Swaption Volatility
Next thing we want to look at is rates volatility in the swaption market. Here we also have all data points, a slider, and the ability to play the whole thing as an animation. With regards to what happens, the overall bid to vol from Covid-19 is clearly the most remarkable. Breaking it down, it mostly hits short expiries and long tails, coming from the fear of massive flatening in the yield curve. On the contrary, volatility on short tails (top left) was staying relatively low, as rate cutting room for the ECB was perceived limited. After the storm passed, stimulus measures did their job, and more time went by towards years end, new lows were reached in rates volatility.

Another interesting thing to look at is what was implied in volatility during the the year and what actually realized. The fgure below shows the ratio of implied to realized volatility. A ratio below 1 indicates a buy signal. Cleary we have one forward looking measure (implied) vs. a backward looking measure (realized), but nevertheless it gives a feeling for what actually was priced in and eventually realized in the rates market. As before, the data set is explorable by a slider and can be played as an animation as well. 

Now we can turn to another forward looking measure to get a sense of what the market is pricing in, in terms of direction for next year. Here we break down the implied volatility of an option with regards to its moneyness (smile / skew). We look at different combinations of expiries and tails. To see what has changed during the course of the year, we take beginnig of year values and compare it to the most recent data. This data set is only interactive in terms of its hover effects.
== Outlook  
As a final remark I wanted to highlight that this blog post was meant to show capabilities of techonolgy for visualisation purposes first. So cleary, the dive into the research aspects could have been deeper. But I would be more than happy if you get in touch and want to discuss this area more thorrowly, as well as, of course, the technological matters of the outlined material. For me personally, I will definitly dig deeper in this interactive figures and also customized dashboards. 
